clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/readability-simplify-boolean-expr.rst, before:

.. title:: clang-tidy - readability-simplify-boolean-expr

readability-simplify-boolean-expr
=================================


Looks for boolean expressions involving boolean constants and simplifies
them to use the appropriate boolean expression directly.

Examples:

===========================================  ================
Initial expression                           Result
-------------------------------------------  ----------------
``if (b == true)``                             ``if (b)``
``if (b == false)``                            ``if (!b)``
``if (b && true)``                             ``if (b)``
``if (b && false)``                            ``if (false)``
``if (b || true)``                             ``if (true)``
``if (b || false)``                            ``if (b)``
``e ? true : false``                           ``e``
``e ? false : true``                           ``!e``
``if (true) t(); else f();``                   ``t();``
``if (false) t(); else f();``                  ``f();``
``if (e) return true; else return false;``     ``return e;``
``if (e) return false; else return true;``     ``return !e;``
``if (e) b = true; else b = false;``           ``b = e;``
``if (e) b = false; else b = true;``           ``b = !e;``
``if (e) return true; return false;``          ``return e;``
``if (e) return false; return true;``          ``return !e;``
===========================================  ================

The resulting expression ``e`` is modified as follows:
  1. Unnecessary parentheses around the expression are removed.
  2. Negated applications of ``!`` are eliminated.
  3. Negated applications of comparison operators are changed to use the
     opposite condition.
  4. Implicit conversions of pointer to ``bool`` are replaced with explicit
     comparisons to ``nullptr``.
  5. Implicit casts to ``bool`` are replaced with explicit casts to ``bool``.
  6. Object expressions with ``explicit operator bool`` conversion operators
     are replaced with explicit casts to ``bool``.

Examples:
  1. The ternary assignment ``bool b = (i < 0) ? true : false;`` has redundant
     parentheses and becomes ``bool b = i < 0;``.

  2. The conditional return ``if (!b) return false; return true;`` has an
     implied double negation and becomes ``return b;``.

  3. The conditional return ``if (i < 0) return false; return true;`` becomes
     ``return i >= 0;``.

     The conditional return ``if (i != 0) return false; return true;`` becomes
     ``return i == 0;``.

  4. The conditional return ``if (p) return true; return false;`` has an
     implicit conversion of a pointer to ``bool`` and becomes
     ``return p != nullptr;``.

     The ternary assignment ``bool b = (i & 1) ? true : false;`` has an
     implicit conversion of ``i & 1`` to ``bool`` and becomes
     ``bool b = static_cast<bool>(i & 1);``.

  5. The conditional return ``if (i & 1) return true; else return false;`` has
     an implicit conversion of an integer quantity ``i & 1`` to ``bool`` and
     becomes ``return static_cast<bool>(i & 1);``

  6. Given ``struct X { explicit operator bool(); };``, and an instance ``x`` of
     ``struct X``, the conditional return ``if (x) return true; return false;``
     becomes ``return static_cast<bool>(x);``

When a conditional boolean return or assignment appears at the end of a
chain of ``if``, ``else if`` statements, the conditional statement is left
unchanged unless the option ``ChainedConditionalReturn`` or
``ChainedConditionalAssignment``, respectively, is specified as non-zero.
The default value for both options is zero.

Commit message:

Expand the simplify boolean expression check to handle implicit conversion of integral types to bool and improve the handling of implicit conversion of member pointers to bool.
Implicit conversion of member pointers are replaced with explicit comparisons to nullptr.

Implicit conversions of integral types are replaced with explicit comparisons to 0.

Patch by Richard Thomson.

clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/readability-simplify-boolean-expr.rst, after:

.. title:: clang-tidy - readability-simplify-boolean-expr

readability-simplify-boolean-expr
=================================


Looks for boolean expressions involving boolean constants and simplifies
them to use the appropriate boolean expression directly.

Examples:

===========================================  ================
Initial expression                           Result
-------------------------------------------  ----------------
``if (b == true)``                             ``if (b)``
``if (b == false)``                            ``if (!b)``
``if (b && true)``                             ``if (b)``
``if (b && false)``                            ``if (false)``
``if (b || true)``                             ``if (true)``
``if (b || false)``                            ``if (b)``
``e ? true : false``                           ``e``
``e ? false : true``                           ``!e``
``if (true) t(); else f();``                   ``t();``
``if (false) t(); else f();``                  ``f();``
``if (e) return true; else return false;``     ``return e;``
``if (e) return false; else return true;``     ``return !e;``
``if (e) b = true; else b = false;``           ``b = e;``
``if (e) b = false; else b = true;``           ``b = !e;``
``if (e) return true; return false;``          ``return e;``
``if (e) return false; return true;``          ``return !e;``
===========================================  ================

The resulting expression ``e`` is modified as follows:
  1. Unnecessary parentheses around the expression are removed.
  2. Negated applications of ``!`` are eliminated.
  3. Negated applications of comparison operators are changed to use the
     opposite condition.
  4. Implicit conversions of pointers, including pointers to members, to
     ``bool`` are replaced with explicit comparisons to ``nullptr`` in C++11
      or ``NULL`` in C++98/03.
  5. Implicit casts to ``bool`` are replaced with explicit casts to ``bool``.
  6. Object expressions with ``explicit operator bool`` conversion operators
     are replaced with explicit casts to ``bool``.
  7. Implicit conversions of integral types to ``bool`` are replaced with
     explicit comparisons to ``0``.

Examples:
  1. The ternary assignment ``bool b = (i < 0) ? true : false;`` has redundant
     parentheses and becomes ``bool b = i < 0;``.

  2. The conditional return ``if (!b) return false; return true;`` has an
     implied double negation and becomes ``return b;``.

  3. The conditional return ``if (i < 0) return false; return true;`` becomes
     ``return i >= 0;``.

     The conditional return ``if (i != 0) return false; return true;`` becomes
     ``return i == 0;``.

  4. The conditional return ``if (p) return true; return false;`` has an
     implicit conversion of a pointer to ``bool`` and becomes
     ``return p != nullptr;``.

     The ternary assignment ``bool b = (i & 1) ? true : false;`` has an
     implicit conversion of ``i & 1`` to ``bool`` and becomes
     ``bool b = (i & 1) != 0;``.

  5. The conditional return ``if (i & 1) return true; else return false;`` has
     an implicit conversion of an integer quantity ``i & 1`` to ``bool`` and
     becomes ``return (i & 1) != 0;``

  6. Given ``struct X { explicit operator bool(); };``, and an instance ``x`` of
     ``struct X``, the conditional return ``if (x) return true; return false;``
     becomes ``return static_cast<bool>(x);``

When a conditional boolean return or assignment appears at the end of a
chain of ``if``, ``else if`` statements, the conditional statement is left
unchanged unless the option ``ChainedConditionalReturn`` or
``ChainedConditionalAssignment``, respectively, is specified as non-zero.
The default value for both options is zero.
